docs/index.rst, before:

*****
SOCKS
*****

Release: |release|

|binder_link|_

SOCKS is a suite of algorithms for stochastic optimal control using kernel methods.

It runs on top of `OpenAI Gym <https://gym.openai.com>`_, and comes with several classic
controls Gym environments. In addition, it can integrate with many pre-existing Gym
environments.

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :maxdepth: 1
    :caption: Contents

    GitHub Repo <https://github.com/ajthor/socks>
    installation

    /examples/index
    /benchmarks/index

    /api/index

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :maxdepth: 1
    :caption: User Guide

    guide/fundamentals
    guide/using_socks
    guide/templates
    contributing/index


Getting Started
===============

Install SOCKS using ``pip``:

.. code-block:: shell

    pip install gym-socks

Check out the :doc:`installation` page for more detailed instructions.


User Guide
==========

Check out the user guide to use SOCKS in your own projects.

:doc:`guide/fundamentals`
    Describes the basic concepts of SOCKS, and gives a quick overview of data-driven
    control.

:doc:`guide/using_socks`
    Information on how to simulate and generate samples from systems, as well as basic
    information about how to use the algorithms in SOCKS.

:doc:`guide/templates`
    Some code templates that can be copy/paste into your own projects.


Examples
========

After reading the user guide, the best way to familiarize yourself with SOCKS is by
checking out several of the key examples.

.. grid:: 2
    :gutter: 1 1 2 3

    .. grid-item-card::
        :link: examples/control/tracking
        :link-type: doc

        **Target Tracking Problem**
        ^^^

        Unconstrained stochastic optimal control.

        +++
        :bdg-primary-line:`control`

    .. grid-item-card::
        :link: examples/reach/stoch_reach_maximal
        :link-type: doc

        **Maximal Stochastic Reachability**
        ^^^

        Compute a policy that maximizes the probability of remaining within a safe set
        and reaching a target set.

        +++
        :bdg-primary-line:`control`
        :bdg-primary-line:`reachability`

    .. grid-item-card::
        :link: examples/reach/forward_reach
        :link-type: doc

        **Forward Reachability**
        ^^^

        Compute a forward reachable set classifier.

        +++
        :bdg-primary-line:`reachability`

    .. grid-item-card::
        :link: examples/control/satellite_rendezvous
        :link-type: doc

        **CWH Problem**
        ^^^

        Satellite rendezvous and docking problem using Clohessy-Wiltshire-Hill dynamics.

        +++
        :bdg-primary-line:`control`


SOCKS can be run using `binder <https://mybinder.org>`_, and all examples can be run
interactively using the |binder_link|_ link included at the top of the example pages.
If you downloaded the code from the `GitHub repo <https://github.com/ajthor/socks>`_,
you can also run the examples locally or using `docker <https://www.docker.com>`_ and
the included Dockerfile.


Cite SOCKS
==========

In order to cite the toolbox, use the following bibtex entry:

.. code-block:: bibtex

    @inproceedings{thorpe2022hscc,
      title     = {{SOCKS}: A Kernel-Based Stochastic Optimal Control and Reachability Toolbox},
      authors   = {Thorpe, Adam J. and Oishi, Meeko M. K.},
      year      = {2022},
      booktitle = {Proceedings of the 25th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control (submitted)}
    }


Indices and Tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`


.. |binder_link| image:: https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg
.. _binder_link: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/ajthor/socks/HEAD

Commit message:

Simplify API (#12)
* Update grid utils.

Removing `make_grid_from_ranges` and `make_grid_from_space`, which had a clunky API. Instead, changing to more canonical `cartesian` and `boxgrid`.

* Moving to reset. Minor changes.

Moving from `env.state = x` to `env.reset(x)`. This is more in line with standard practices seen in other implementations.

* Update batch_generator.

Change generate_batch to batch_generator.

* Fixing typo.

* Change regularized inverse syntax.

* Update test_kernel.py

* Updating kernel metrics.

Update kernel metrics to perform validation from sklearn. In practice, sklearn kernels are faster.

* Adding kernel & distance functions.

Changing implementation to use internal validation, distance metrics, and kernel functions. Decided this keeps the package self-contained, and slims down dependencies.

* Update separating kernel algorithm.

Fixes #2

* Adding Woodbury inversion function.

Adding Woodbury matrix inversion function as an alternative to the regularized_inverse.

* Update sampling functions.

Changed sample_generator to use sample_fn, which now returns a generator wrapper class that can be modified to include useful functions and attributes.

* Revert regularization parameter name.

Changed back to descriptive name.

* Adding tutorials.

* Code cleanup.

* Updating user guide.

* Adding documents to user guide.

Minor changes throughout. Added "for Gym users" document.

* Update index.rst

* Add observation sampler.

docs/index.rst, after:

*****
SOCKS
*****

Release: |release|

|binder_link|_

SOCKS is a suite of algorithms for stochastic optimal control using kernel methods.

It runs on top of `OpenAI Gym <https://gym.openai.com>`_, and comes with several classic
controls Gym environments. In addition, it can integrate with many pre-existing Gym
environments.

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :maxdepth: 1
    :caption: Contents

    GitHub Repo <https://github.com/ajthor/socks>
    installation

    /examples/index
    /benchmarks/index

    /api/index

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :maxdepth: 1
    :caption: User Guide

    guide/fundamentals
    guide/kernel_tutorial/tutorial
    guide/using_socks
    guide/templates
    contributing/index


Getting Started
===============

Install SOCKS using ``pip``:

.. code-block:: shell

    pip install gym-socks

Check out the :doc:`installation` page for more detailed instructions.


User Guide
==========

Check out the user guide to use SOCKS in your own projects.

:doc:`guide/fundamentals`
    Describes the basic concepts of SOCKS, and gives a quick overview of data-driven
    control.

:doc:`guide/kernel_tutorial/tutorial`
    A tutorial on kernel methods to get you started.

:doc:`guide/using_socks`
    Information on how to simulate and generate samples from systems, as well as basic
    information about how to use the algorithms in SOCKS.

:doc:`guide/templates`
    Some code templates that can be copy/paste into your own projects.


Examples
========

After reading the user guide, the best way to familiarize yourself with SOCKS is by
checking out several of the key examples.

.. grid:: 2
    :gutter: 1 1 2 3

    .. grid-item-card::
        :link: examples/control/tracking
        :link-type: doc

        **Target Tracking Problem**
        ^^^

        Unconstrained stochastic optimal control.

        +++
        :bdg-primary-line:`control`

    .. grid-item-card::
        :link: examples/reach/stoch_reach_maximal
        :link-type: doc

        **Maximal Stochastic Reachability**
        ^^^

        Compute a policy that maximizes the probability of remaining within a safe set
        and reaching a target set.

        +++
        :bdg-primary-line:`control`
        :bdg-primary-line:`reachability`

    .. grid-item-card::
        :link: examples/reach/forward_reach
        :link-type: doc

        **Forward Reachability**
        ^^^

        Compute a forward reachable set classifier.

        +++
        :bdg-primary-line:`reachability`

    .. grid-item-card::
        :link: examples/control/satellite_rendezvous
        :link-type: doc

        **CWH Problem**
        ^^^

        Satellite rendezvous and docking problem using Clohessy-Wiltshire-Hill dynamics.

        +++
        :bdg-primary-line:`control`


SOCKS can be run using `binder <https://mybinder.org>`_, and all examples can be run
interactively using the |binder_link|_ link included at the top of the example pages.
If you downloaded the code from the `GitHub repo <https://github.com/ajthor/socks>`_,
you can also run the examples locally or using `docker <https://www.docker.com>`_ and
the included Dockerfile.


Cite SOCKS
==========

In order to cite the toolbox, use the following bibtex entry:

.. code-block:: bibtex

    @inproceedings{thorpe2022hscc,
      title     = {{SOCKS}: A Kernel-Based Stochastic Optimal Control and Reachability Toolbox},
      authors   = {Thorpe, Adam J. and Oishi, Meeko M. K.},
      year      = {2022},
      booktitle = {Proceedings of the 25th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control}
    }

Or from `ACM <https://doi.org/10.1145/3501710.3519525>`_.

Also check out the live presentation of SOCKS on `YouTube
<https://youtu.be/EfIPzpHy-YQ>`_.

Indices and Tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`


.. |binder_link| image:: https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg
.. _binder_link: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/ajthor/socks/HEAD
